Title: The Great American Gamble, by Keith Payne
Date: 2015-02-21 17:36
Author: 0x7df
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 61
Status: draft

In [this
book](http://www.amazon.com/The-Great-American-Gamble-Twenty-First-ebook/dp/B0051IX0SU),
the phrase "great American gamble" is used to refer to the conscious
decision, dating back to the 1960s, not to develop strategic defence
systems or to protect the civilian population from nuclear strike. The
reason for not doing so is to remain vulnerable, which assists in
maintaining a stable balance of terror to prevent nuclear war. Strategic
defensive systems, in this paradigm, are considered destabilising.

Virtually all sides of US policy debate ultimately adhered to or acceded
to this policy, and debates during the [Cold
War](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cold_War) about nuclear doctrine reflected
only variations on this theme, not significant departures from it.

However, the concept of a stable balance of terror assumes that the
adversary will choose to be deterred; whenever a threat is issued, the
threatened party, having free will, controls whether it is an effective
threat or not by choosing whether to comply or not. The assumption that
a well-managed balance of terror will predictably deter an adversary,
regardless of his goals, ideology and interests, the domestic context,
and the circumstances of an attendant crisis, is convenient and
simplified. It may have worked in the particular circumstances of the
Cold War, but may not be so universally.

In addition to deterring a direct nuclear attack by the [Soviet
Union](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet_Union), the US was concerned
throughout the Cold War to deter a Soviet conventional attack on Europe.
The Soviet Union had massive conventional superiority, at one time for
example having 140
[divisions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Division_%28military%29), with
the ability to raise 400 divisions within 30 days, in compared with
[NATO](http://www.nato.int/)'s 30 divisions. It was unquestionably able
to conquer Europe in a conventional war. Consequently NATO emphasised
nuclear deterrence in the hope of preventing this; in effect the US
extended its "nuclear umbrella" over Europe, by threatening nuclear
escalation in the face of a Soviet conventional advance into Europe.

However, whether or not this threat was credible, and how to make it so,
was the subject of great debate. The Soviet ability to retaliate after
nuclear attack by the US was so great as to make such an attack an
essentially suicidal act. It was therefore often contended that the US
would not risk its existence to defend Europe against a conventional
advance by the [USSR](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet_Union), and
therefore that the nuclear threat was not credible.

Two schools of thought emerged in response to this:

-   The first, lead by [Herman Kahn](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herman_Kahn),
    contended that the threat as it stood was not credible and that the
    only way to make it credible was to defend against nuclear
    retaliation. By limiting the damage the Soviets could inflict on the
    US, using
    [BMD](http://www.cfr.org/missile-defense/ballistic-missile-defense/p30607)
    and air defences against bombers, the US could survive the Soviet
    retaliatory strike that would inevitably follow US nuclear
    escalation. By assuring its own survival given such a course of
    action, the US could demonstrate its willingness to follow such a
    course if necessary, thus making the threat credible. Such defensive
    capabilities would also have the secondary function of limiting
    damage in the event that deterrence failed. Furthermore the US
    needed to be able to threaten a wide range of Soviet targets -
    military and political targets as well as cities and industry - to
    be credible.
-   The second, lead by [Thomas
    Schelling](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Schelling), argued
    that the threat was enough and that strategic defences were not
    necessary. His reasoning was that, even if the US was not willing to
    initiate a deliberate nuclear strike against the USSR, and therefore
    the threat was not credible, the risk of such a strike being
    initiated by "chance, accident, third-party influence, imperfection
    in the machinery of decision, or just processes that we do not
    entirely understand" is enough to deter. The possibility that
    irrationality, miscalculation or imprudence in the "fog of war"
    could result in nuclear attack is great enough that whether the US
    was prepared to take a conscious decision to do so is irrelevant.

