Title: "Windscale 1957: Anatomy of an Accident", by Lorna Arnold
Date: 2015-02-22 15:06
Author: 0x7df
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 63
Status: draft

[Windscale](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windscale_fire)was the site of the
first production nuclear reactors in the UK (the first ever UK reactors
were the research reactors [GLEEP](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GLEEP)and
[BEPO](www.neimagazine.com/features/featurecurtains-for-bepo/), built at
[Harwell](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atomic_Energy_Research_Establishment)in
1947 and 1948). There were two piles, both built to provide
[plutonium](http://www.epa.gov/radiation/radionuclides/plutonium.html)
for the UK nuclear weapons programme. (They also provided
^210^[Po](http://www.webelements.com/polonium/) and
[T](http://www.physics.isu.edu/radinf/tritium.htm) via the irradiation
of cartridges of [boron
oxide](http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/aldrich/426172) and
[lithium-magnesium
alloy,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnesium_alloy#Magnesium-lithium_alloys)
respectively.)

Work on Windscale began in 1947. Pile no. 1 went critical in 1950 and
pile no. 2 in 1951. They were [natural
uranium](www.world-nuclear.org/info/.../What-is-Uranium--How-Does-it-Work-/),
[graphite](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphite)-[moderated](http://www.doitpoms.ac.uk/tlplib/nuclear_materials/moderators.php)
and air-cooled reactors. The US had used water cooling for their
plutonium production reactors at [Hanford](http://www.hanford.gov/), but
this raised practical problems for the UK: a site which could supply the
required volume of water, and which was sufficiently far from any centre
of population given the inherent danger of water cooling (due to the
severity of [loss-of-coolant
accidents](http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/basic-ref/glossary/loss-of-coolant-accident-loca.html)),
could not be found. However it was found that "finning" the fuel element
cartridges to increase heat transfer, and introducing air at the side
rather than the bottom, helped overcome the difficulties of gas cooling
which had previously caused that method to be rejected by both the UK
and US, and a decision was made to build atmospheric-pressure air-cooled
piles, which need not be so far from centres of population. Hence the
Windscale site was found to be adequate.

Each reactor consisted of 2000 tons of graphite blocks in an octagonal
stack. The graphite blocks were pierced by horizontal fuel channels -
3440 in all - into each of which 21 fuel elements were loaded, giving a
total of over 70,000 fuel elements weighing a total of over 180 tons.
The fuel elements were loaded from the "charge face" (the front face of
the pile), and when the fuel elements in a channel were to be removed,
they were pushed back through the channels out of the rear "discharge
face" and fell into skips in a water duct. Fuel channels were in groups
of 4 and amongst each group of 4 was a smaller channel used for loading
absorbers (to correct the power distribution) and isotope cans for
irradiation. There were also 24 horizontal
[boron-steel](http://www.tatasteeleurope.com/en/products-and-services/flat/narrow-strip/offering/boron-steels)
[control
rods](http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/basic-ref/glossary/control-rod.html).

Fuel was natural uranium, but when [low-enriched
uranium](http://web.ead.anl.gov/uranium/glossacro/dsp_wordpopup.cfm?word_id=292)
first became available from
[Capenhurst](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capenhurst), this was used as well to
counteract the depression of power in the core due to the
neutron-absorbing isotope cartridges.

The 1957 fire in Windscale pile no. 1 occurred during an annealing
process to release [Wigner
energy](http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/643429/Wigner-effect).
Wigner energy is [potential
energy](http://www.physicsclassroom.com/class/energy/Lesson-1/Potential-Energy)
stored in a crystalline material such as graphite due to the
displacement of atoms in the lattice upon bombardment by neutrons. The
energy can be deliberately released by heating the graphite and
[annealing](http://www.physicsclassroom.com/class/energy/Lesson-1/Potential-Energy)the
crystal structure, yielding more heat. However if this is not done, the
energy accumulates and can lead to a spontaneous and uncontrolled
release which may be dangerous. It is only a problem in relatively
low-temperature reactors; in higher temperature reactors the annealing
process goes on continually, preventing Wigner energy from building up.

This problem was not considered at Windscale until 1952, when a minor
spontaneous Wigner release occurred in pile no. 2 (this was observed as
an anomalous increase in temperature in part of the pile, and was
quickly brought under control by increasing the flow of air), followed
by a second event the same year in pile no. 1, while the pile was shut
down. It was decided to do a deliberate anneal of the remainder of pile
no. 2 (where increased temperatures had not been observed and where, it
was conjectured, stored Wigner energy still remained.) This and
subsequent anneals were performed by shutting down the cooling fans and
raising the power to increase the reactor temperature (applying nuclear
heating), until sudden temperature increases were observed in specially
installed [thermocouples](http://www.thermocoupleinfo.com/index.htm),
indicating the release of Wigner energy.

Each Wigner release was different and there was no defined "correct"
procedure for performing one. During the 1957 Wigner release, the
initial nuclear heating of one part of the pile did not appear to have
worked, the relevant thermocouples not having shown the expected sudden
temperature rises. Therefore a second nuclear heating was applied to
raise the temperature yet further. The official explanation for the
fire, published in a government white paper (Cmd 302) a month after the
incident, was that the second nuclear heating was applied "before it was
necessary" and "at too rapid a rate" and thus caused "the failure of one
or more [fuel] cartridges whose contents then oxidised slowly,
eventually leading to the fire", and that the accident was due "partly
to faults of judgement by the operating staff". This conclusion was
based on the results of an inquiry chaired by [William
Penney](http://www.oxfordtimes.co.uk/news/yourtown/oxford/9994337.William_Penney__There_as_the_new_age_dawned/),
although Penney's report did not mention errors of judgement by the
operators.

However, Penney's inquiry was conducted immediately after the accident
and had to report very quickly; not all the relevant evidence was
available to it. In particular, when pile no. 2 was shut down later,
some of the lithium-magnesium cartridges were found to be severely
damaged, and when Penney saw photos of these he commented that they
might have changed the conclusions of his report had he known about
them. Other scientists already believed by this time that the
lithium-magnesium cartridges had had a significant role in the accident,
even though Penney's report had discounted this as an "unlikely"
potential cause. A report published in early 1958 suggested that it was
a lithium-magnesium cartridge that had caught fire initially, which in
turn had lead to the oxidation of the surrounding graphite, generating
enough heat to propagate the fire. Furthermore, lithium was observed to
be present in the stack filters prior to the increase in fission
products. A second alternative explanation is that the graphite itself
caused the fire: previously graphite was thought to be resistant to
oxidation up to temperatures significantly higher than those reached in
the Wigner anneal, but when the graphite in pile no. 2 was studied in
detail after shut-down, it was found that its resistance to oxidation
had been greatly degraded by years of irradiation. Despite the increased
likelihood of these possible alternatives, in which human error played
no part, no revision to the official explanation was ever published.

The main public health hazard caused by Windscale was posed by
[^131^I](http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/isotopes/iodine.asp), which
has an 8-day
[half-life](http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/nuclear/halfli.html),
and can be be consumed by humans via cow's milk. This is particular
hazardous to children due to their higher consumption of milk and the
smaller size of their thyroids, where iodine accumulates. Consequently a
milk ban was issued, and all milk produced close to the Windscale site
was destroyed for some time afterwards. In general the assessments of
the public danger caused by the accident through this contaminant have
been that it was negligible.

