Title: "The Trap: Whatever Happened to Our Dream of Freedom?", by Adam Curtis
Date: 2015-02-22 11:51
Author: 0x7df
Category: Uncategorized
Tags: cold war, economics, game theory, nash equilibrium
Slug: 65
Status: draft

*[The Trap: Whatever Happened to Our Dream of
Freedom](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0979263/)* was a three-part
documentary by the British film-maker [Adam
Curtis,](http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/adamcurtis) which aired on
theÂ [BBC](http://www.bbc.co.uk) in 2007. Here are a few notes on the
first part - *[F**k You
Buddy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Trap_%28TV_series%29#1._.22F.2A.2Ak_You_Buddy.22_.2811_March_2007.29)*.

After the [depression in the
1930s](www.history.com/topics/great-depression) and the [Second World
War](www.bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/wwtwo), the established political
view was that no-holds-barred
[capitalism](dictionary.reference.com/browse/capitalism), founded on
individual liberty, did not work, and greater government intervention
was required to prevent another depression. Economies could not be
driven purely by [free
markets](http://www.investopedia.com/terms/f/freemarket.asp) but
required regulation by government.

Over the subsequent years government bureaucracies increased enormously,
attempting to regulate economies for the good of everyone.

[Friedrich von
Hayek](http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/bios/Hayek.html), and Austrian
aristocrat who had escaped the Nazis, argued that this was a dangerous
strategy and pointed to the [Soviet
Union](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet_Union) as an example of what happens
when too much control is exercised by government. Government control to
plan society inevitably lead to tyranny and dictatorship, and was far
worse than the problems of capitalism. He called this '[the road to
serfdom](http://mises.org/library/road-serfdom-0)'.

Von Hayek proposed a 'self-directing automatic system', a spontaneous
order based on individuals striving for personal gain. Von Hayek's ideas
however were dismissed by politicians and economists.

However, during the [Cold War](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cold_War), nuclear
strategists in the US, particularly those at the [Rand
Corporation](www.rand.org), developed and applied [game
theory](www.gametheory.net) as an objective, mathematical basis for
approaching nuclear strategy.

Underpinning game theory is the assumption that individuals act entirely
in their own self-interest. It also suggests, as in the [prisoner's
dilemma](plato.stanford.edu/entries/prisoner-dilemma/), that betraying
the other person is always the best strategy.

The mathematician [John
Nash](www-history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/Biographies/Nash.html) (portrayed by
[Russell Crowe](https://twitter.com/russellcrowe) in the film [*A
Beautiful Mind*](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0268978/)) took this
further and proved that isolated individuals acting alone and entirely
in their own self-interest can reach a stable equilibrium, which
benefits everyone. However if people cooperate the equilibrium is not
achieved and the results are unpredictable. Nash won the Nobel Prize for
his work.

Nash's work had an influence on politics in that it proved that a
society based on individual self-interest would not necessarily lead to
total chaos, but would lead to order; the [Nash
equilibrium](https://www.khanacademy.org/economics-finance-domain/microeconomics/nash-equilibrium-tutorial).
It provided a scientific basis for von Hayek's idea of self-directing
order based on individual freedom.

However, the theory did not match observations of human interactions,
which suggested that humans do not always act with pure self-interest,
but co-operate and display altruism.

The Scottish psychiatrist [R D
Laing](http://laingsociety.org/biograph.htm) was, at the time,
experimenting with treatments for schizophrenics. He noticed that the
doctors never talked to the patients, so as an experiment he spent
months talking to 12 patients; this was so successful that they were
able to leave the hospital, but within a year they had all returned.
This shifted Laing's focus on to studying the conditions of family life
and how family members behaved towards each other; he became convinced
that this was the root of a wide range of mental problems.

Laing had learnt about game theory and used it to analyse the "games"
played by people in their inter-personal relations; games in the sense
that there were rules, although some of which were secret.

He showed that the family was essentially an arena for strategising;
family members used their everyday actions as strategies to control and
manipulate each other. What were normally seen as acts of kindness and
love were actually weapons, used to exert control. Love was a way in
which one person tried to dominate another person.

He argued that this continual struggle lead to stability in society but
a bleak existence for individuals.

Laing became radicalised, believing people could fundamentally not be
trusted, including those in public office. He became a leading member of
the 1960s counter-culture.

Laing and his followers on the left found unlikely allies in a group of
right-wing economists in the US influenced by von Hayek, many of whom
came from the Rand Corporation.

These economists put forward a theory called [public choice
theory](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_choice), based on the mathematics
of game theory, which said the fundamental reality of life was that all
people were strategising against each other for their own personal
advantage. What had been an assumption in game theory had become a
truth. Their leader was [James
Buchanan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_M._Buchanan).

Specifically, politicians' and bureaucrats' belief that they were
working in the public good was false. There is no real measurable
concept of "the public good" that exists; rather than helping others,
politicians and other groups in control work in their own self-interest
at the expense of others.

In the 1970s the British economy was spiralling out of control, and
proponents of public choice theory claimed the chaos was a result of the
fallacy that government was working in the good of the public, when it
was in fact working in its own interest

This view heavily influenced [Margaret
Thatcher](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Margaret_Thatcher); James
Buchanan was brought to the UK by a right-wing think-tank advising the
Thatcher government to give a series of seminars.

As this idea spread throughout government, the result was the tearing
down of institutions, of elites who thought they knew what was best for
the public good. This was manifest in Thatcher's reform of the [health
service](www.nhs.uk) for example; the medical elite that controlled the
health service was replaced with a new system of management that centred
on incentives. If people essentially worked in their own interest, then
they could be incentivised to perform well and work efficiently by
offering them personal gain as a reward. Systems of targets were used to
measure this. This approach was pioneered by [Thomas
Enthoven](http://www.gsb.stanford.edu/faculty-research/faculty/alain-c-enthoven)
in the US DOD, and it heavily influence US Secretary of Defence [Robert
McNamara](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_McNamara)'s running of the
Vietnam war (in which there were targets for body count, for example).
It was Enthoven who advised the Thatcher government on the reform of the
health service.

The conclusion is that the view of humans as isolated individuals with
essentially no real emotion or altruism, but only a desire to work for
their own gain and self-interest, moved from being a simplified
approximation that allowed John Nash and the game theorists to produce
tractable mathematics, to becoming a fundamental truth about human
nature that guided the governing of society in the UK. Government moved
away from the assumption that public servants were motivated by doing
good for the public interest, to the assumption that they were working
in their own interest and therefore had to be offered personal
incentives in order to perform well, necessitating targets to measure
this performance.

