Title: "The Soviet Union's Last Stand", by Malcolm Brinkworth
Date: 2015-02-22 16:10
Author: 0x7df
Category: Uncategorized
Tags: cold war
Slug: 67
Status: draft

The [*Soviet Union's Last Stand*](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1173570/)
was a television documentary by [Malcolm
Brinkworth](https://explore.bfi.org.uk/4ce2ba0f5f152) that aired on [BBC
Four](http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbcfour) in 2007. The events it documented
are summarised below:

-   By 1991 Gorbachev had been in power for six years and had made great
    reforms in the Soviet Union, bringing increased freedom and
    democracy.
-   However this freedom had also brought with it uncertainty and
    discontent. Also the USSR's economy was in a nosedive; food was
    scarce.
-   In August 1991 Gorbachev went on holiday to his villa on the Crimean
    Sea. He had been negotiating a new union treaty with the
    increasingly nationalistic republics which wanted independence.
    While away, his Prime Minister saw the text of the treaty and
    realised that it would essentially spell the end of the Soviet
    Union.
-   The Prime Minister called together senior members of the government
    including the head of the KGB, and this group unanimously agreed
    that Gorbachev must not sign the treaty.
-   In an extraordinary breach of protocol they turned up, unannounced,
    at Gorbachev's villa demanding a meeting. They claimed to want
    simply to talk to Gorbachev to ask him not to sign the treaty, but
    the KGB had cut off Gorbachev's phone lines. They asked him to
    return to Moscow and meet with the leaders of the republics, but he
    refused, and they asked him to sign a state of emergency decree, but
    he refused. With no communications, he was cut off, including from
    the Soviet nuclear trigger.
-   The group announced that Gorbachev was ill and could not fulfil his
    duties, and therefore the vice president became acting president and
    signed a state of emergency. Essentially, the "emergency committee"
    had seized power. All political parties other than the Communist
    Party were banned and the army was brought in to maintain control.
-   Boris Yeltsin was President of Russia, and was striving for
    independence from the Soviet Union and a sovereign, democratic
    Russia. As an enemy of Gorbachev, the emergency committee wanted to
    offer Yeltsin the presidency of the Soviet Union in order to
    preserve the Union. This offer was bungled (it was done over the
    phone rather than face to face), and Yeltsin refused.
-   Yeltsin had his base at the Russian Parliament, nicknamed the White
    House, and he went there. Yeltsin had popular support, and
    approximately 30,000 of his supporters surrounded and barricaded the
    White House, in the hope that the Russian army, under the control of
    the emergency committee, would not want to risk the blood of Russian
    people. They called the bluff of the emergency committee and won
    out, as once the army realised the scale of the bloodshed that would
    be necessary to neutralise Yeltsin, they withdrew.
-   Yeltsin claimed victory. A delegation from Yeltsin and a delegation
    of the emergency committee now raced to Gorbachev, who refused to
    see the latter but welcomed Yeltsin's delegation with open arms.
-   Yeltsin subsequently attacked Gorbachev, and banned the Russian
    Communist Party. Gorbachev soon realised that communism could not be
    reformed, and took the extraordinary action of resigning as head of
    the Communist Party and recommending that it be disbanded.
-   Within months, most of the Soviet republics had declared
    independence; on Christmas Day, the red flag was lowered over the
    Kremlin for the last time.

