Title: Programme Management Demystified, by Geoff Reiss
Date: 2015-02-21 19:20
Author: 0x7df
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 69
Status: draft

<span style="text-decoration:underline;"></span>

Introduction

What is Programme Management?

Programme management is the coordinated management of a portfolio of
projects that call upon the same resources, to achieve a set of business
objectives.

In particular, programme management consists of the following
responsibilities:

-   Defining programmes and projects based on the organisation's
    strategy
-   Describing the scope and boundaries of the programme

-   Evaluating risks and benefits of specific projects

-   Maintaining the relevant section of the work breakdown structure

-   Controlling the membership of the project management team

-   Establishing and operating an approval procedure for projects
-   Approving projects' budgets and timescales
-   Assigning projects to project managers

-   Managing conflicts between projects and between functions

-   Monitoring progress towards projects milestones

-   Making decisions about future workload

-   Understanding the impact of projects on each other

-   Understanding the impact of changes in functional areas on projects

-   Analysing past project performance

-   Risk management

<div>

  ------------------------------------ ------------------------------------
  Programme Management                 Ongoing
  Project Management                   Fixed timescale
  ------------------------------------ ------------------------------------

</div>

Types of Project

-   Internal or external. Internal projects are designed to change the
    organisation within which they run, whereas external projects have a
    deliverable for a customer.
-   Closed or open. Closed projects involve the delivery of something
    that is clearly specified, and can therefore have a clear timescale.
    Open projects usually start from requirements and involve the
    development or design of something. For example, building a hotel
    from drawings and specifications is a closed project, designing a
    hotel from a set of customer requirements is an open project.

-   Physical or non-physical. Physical projects have a tangible
    deliverable. Non-physical projects include software development and
    scientific R&D.

Projects can also be classified as "runners", "repeaters" and
"strangers":

-   Runners are mainstream projects typical of the organisation that
    happen all the time: the bread and butter.

-   Repeaters are less typical projects that require a little more
    attention from the organisation and are slightly riskier.

-   Strangers are one-off projects that the organisation has little or
    no experience of, and is likely to be higher risk.

Benefits of Programme Management

1.  Encourages forward planning.

1.  Leads to better communication.
2.  Allows something to monitor against.

Managing the Programme

Programme Definition

One simple tool to help evaluate a project's viability is a graphical
comparison of a set of alternative projects based on three factors:
value, risk and demand for resources. Plot each project as a symbol on a
chart with "demand for resources" on the x-axis and "value" on the
y-axis. Then make the size of the symbol representing each projects
represent "risk": the larger the symbol the more risky the project.
Small symbols in the top-left portion are better than large symbols in
the bottom-right.

Structured Diagrams

There are three types:

1.  Products breakdown structure (PBS)

1.  Work breakdown structure (WBS)
2.  Organisation breakdown structure (OBS)

The PBS (or component breakdown structure) is a hierarchical diagram
showing the breakdown of the physical deliverable into its sub-systems
and components. It is not chronological, and says nothing about what has
to be done or who will do it. There may be more than one way to break
the product down into a hierarchy.

The WBS indicates the work that has to be done. The task of conducting
the project is broken down into a hierarchy of subtasks. Each subtask is
a "work package". The WBS does not take into account the logical flow of
the work, but is concerned with only identifying the tasks and
organising them. Critical path diagrams or PERT charts can be used to
link the tasks together into a logical sequence.

A "responsibility assignment matrix" or "responsibility chart" can be
used to link the WBS to the people or teams available to do the work.
The elements of the WBS are listed down the left-hand-side and the names
of people or teams (and their functions) along the top. Then in each
cell write "R" (responsible), "A" (accountable), "C" (consulted) or "I"
(informed). Only one person can be accountable. The responsible people
are those that will actually do the work. Those denoted with "C" will be
consulted about the task and therefore contribute to it, whereas "I"
indicates that the individual will be kept informed about the task but
will not contribute to it.

Problems in Programme Management

1.  Resource conflicts occur.
2.  Responsibility for the programme is often assumed but no authority
    over the resources is given.

1.  The work plan may change rapidly requiring frequent updates.

1.  Data are available on the work done (e.g. through timesheets), but
    the important question is "how much is left to do?"

1.  Downtime (staff holidays, training, administration) is difficult to
    estimate and account for.

Budgets, Cost Control and Finance

Many organisations require that projects pass through a series of stages
or phases, and may relate permission or approval to these stages (e.g.
through stage gates). Most stage approaches are based on three main
phases:

1.  Concept or initial design

1.  Detailed or final design

1.  Construction or implementation

Approval is usually required between concept and detailed design, then
again between detailed design and implementation. Cost estimates for the
project are likely to be less accurate in the early phases and ought to
become increasingly accurate as the project progresses. The uncertainty
on the cost estimate may also be asymmetric: for the example the
uncertainty may be -20% to +50% at the beginning, -10% to +30% in the
detailed design stage, and -5% to +15% in the implementation phase. This
reflects the higher likelihood, or the greater impact, of costs rising
rather than falling. Furthermore, as the project progresses, and the
amount of money committed increases, the ability to influence the
project falls. The cost of making changes increases.

Expenditure on a project can be plotted as a cash-flow curve: a
cumulative graph of expenditure over the life of the project. Estimated
and actual expenditure can be plotted on the same diagram to monitor
costs. An "earned-value analysis" (EVA) graph shows:

1.  The planned expenditure (the "budgeted cost of work scheduled")

1.  The actual expenditure (the "actual cost of work scheduled")
2.  The value of the work actually done (the "budgeted cost of work
    performed")

Matrix Management

Matrix management is a technique that allows multiple projects or
programmes of work to be mapped to the functional areas of the
organisation. Organisations structured in this way have two hierarchies.
The first is a functional hierarchy in which functional managers run
departments comprised of specialists or operatives of a particular type:
designers, software developers, sales people, etc. The second is a
programme hierarchy in which project managers take responsibility for
specific projects, which are grouped into programmes of work run by
programme managers. The project and programme managers plan and manage
work but don't do anything directly, and are not responsible for the
resources required to conduct the projects.

There are several styles of matrix management.

1.  Subcontract matrix. Each project manager is given a budget for each
    project, and he "buys" work from functional departments. This works
    very well where there is more than one functional department that
    can compete for the work, and the project manager can essentially
    invite functional departments to "bid" for work. Tasks assigned to a
    functional department are then managed by and within that department
    until they are completed and handed back to the project manager, who
    may have little or no interaction with the individuals doing the
    work. One disadvantage with this approach is that there is no
    project team: each functional department works in isolation from the
    others involved in the project, and have only limited involvement in
    the project as a whole.
2.  Full-time assignment matrix. In this approach the project manager
    builds a project team for the duration of the project, asking
    functional managers to assign personnel from their areas to the
    project. The functional areas act more like staffing agencies,
    providing manpower to multiple projects. The disadvantage of this
    approach is that staff essentially have two lines of authority: the
    long-term future and career path are the responsibility of the
    functional manager, while the project manager has responsibility for
    the particular work delivered in the short-term.
3.  Part-time assignment matrix. This is something of a hybrid of the
    above. As in the full-time assignment matrix, staff from functional
    areas are loaned out to projects and become part of the project team
    for the duration. However, as in the subcontracting model, they
    remain located in their functional areas and probably work part-time
    on a number of different projects. This gives rise to one of the
    main disadvantages of this approach: the difficulty faced by
    functional staff juggling the conflicting demands of multiple
    projects. Furthermore this is a model in which project managers have
    responsibility for their projects but little or no authority over
    the functional staff performing the work.

Most departments have a significant amount of non-project work to
balance with project work: at the very least there is administrative
work and training. This needs to be taken into account, either by
calculating how many hours a full-time employee actually contributes to
the project, or by including some or all of the non-project work in the
project plan.

