Title: Product Development for the Lean Enterprise, by ?
Date: 2015-02-21 19:21
Author: 0x7df
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 71
Status: draft

<ul>
<ul>
-   Toyota has been consistently more successful than its competitors,
    even in harsh economic periods. This is often attributable to its
    Toyota Production System: a manufacturing system developed to
    eliminate waste as far as possible, and from which the concept of
    "lean" subsequently emerged.

-   However, lean manufacturing is only part of Toyota's success, as
    illustrated by the failure of many other organisations to mimic
    Toyota's success despite implementing lean manufacturing. A second
    vital aspect that is much less well known is Toyota's Product
    Development System (TPDS).

-   Toyota's Product Development System is not simply the result of
    applying waste reduction to product development , in the same way
    that the TPS is the result of reducing waste in manufacturing.
    Instead it is an entirely different paradigm or operating
    philosophy.
-   Toyota does not have a detailed step-by-step process describing how
    to do product development. Instead, they have a knowledge-based
    environment in which knowledge from all previous projects about what
    works and what doesn't is captured, made available and widely used.
    New products more or less emerge from the collective learning.

<ul>
<li>
There are four cornerstone elements to the TPS:

1.  Set-based concurrent engineering (the process)

</li>
1.  Workforce expertise (the people)

1.  System-designer entrepreneurial leadership (the leaders)

1.  Responsibility-based planning and control (the control system)

</ul>
</ul>
</ul>
 

**Set-Based Concurrent Engineering**

 

In a traditional linear engineering process, one of several system
concepts is selected and partitioned into subsystems linked by interface
specifications, then the subsystems are designed independently before
being integrated at the systems level. Problems arising in the
integration step result in "loopbacks", unplanned iterations of the
design process.

 

In set-based engineering, multiple sets of possibilities are explored at
the subsystem level, given broad targets, then narrowed and/or combined
as the targets tighten. The interfaces are deliberately kept loose to
retain flexibility. If a system has five subsystems, and three
system-level concepts are developed, then traditionally there are three
options for each subsystem. However in a set-based philosophy, the
process begins with three options for each subsystem, which due to the
deliberate flexibility of the interfaces, can be combined in any way to
give 35 options at the system level, for no extra effort. If each option
for each subsystem has an 0.8 chance of success, then each combination
of options has a 0.85 = 0.33 chance of success. For three unique
combinations (the traditional model), then there is a (1-0.33)3 = 0.3
chance that all three fail. If the subsystems are interoperable, then
there is a (1-0.8)3 = 0.008 chance of all three options for any single
subsystem, will fail, and a (1-0.008)5 = 0.96 chance that no subsystems
fail (i.e. total success).

 

Importantly, for each subsystem, one option that will certainly work is
kept as part of the option set, for redundancy; as knowledge and
confidence grow, redundancies can be dropped. The probability of success
is therefore 1. If novel, improved, higher-risk options ultimately fail,
the lower risk redundancy option means that unplanned loopbacks are not
necessary, and the knowledge gained from the failed option is recorded
and made available for future projects. This allows an infusion of new
ideas to be combined with risk aversion, which are normally mutually
exclusive philosophies. Rather than having system-level specifications
to which subsystem designers must design, knowledge of performance of
subsystems is the driver for the system-level design.

 

**Workforce Expertise**

 

There is a requirement for a highly skilled, knowledgable workforce.
Engineers stay on a technical career track so that they can continue to
build up knowledge and experience, and rather than getting promoted into
management, they get rewarded for that experience. Furthermore,
functional managers are primarily teachers; engineers are expected to
take responsibility, so they have to learn from their managers, who are
the most competent engineers with the most experience.

 

**System-Designer Project Leadership**

 

While the functional managers are responsible for the teaching and
technical excellence of the staff, the project leader is responsible for
managing the set-based process and for making the narrowing and
combining decisions. In order to be able to make these decisions, the
project leader has to be the best technical person available: i.e. The
chief engineer for the project is assigned this role. The staff do not
report to him, but decisions about the project are ultimately made by
him.

 

**Responsibility-Based Planning and Control**

 

*It is the nature of product development that there will be
variability.* ***There has to be if there is to be innovation.*** Tasks
to be done in the future are defined based on the results of current
tasks, therefore laying out a project plan consisting of a linear
sequence of tasks from start to finish cannot work. Therefore a
task-based planning system is replaced with a responsibility-based
planning system in TPDS. In this:

<ul>
-   The chief engineer as the project leader sets a number of target
    times for key integrating events or milestones. These are imperative
    dates, and they never slip; if a particular subsystem alternative is
    not ready, there is a backup standing by that is used. These are not
    like normal milestones in which a particular identified sub-task has
    to have been completed, but are for decision-making.
-   Once the chief engineer has decided what has to be ready for each
    integrating event, he sets responsibilities for achieving those
    results. Those responsible for some aspect must work out their own
    schedule for meeting the deadline. I.e. the workforce is
    responsible: the planning and the execution is done by the same
    people, unlike the traditional model where planners are responsible
    for creating a schedule which the engineers must try to keep to. The
    overall plan is simply the aggregation of the individual plans.

</ul>

