Title: The Rules of EQ, by Rob Yeung
Date: 2015-02-21 19:23
Author: 0x7df
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 73
Status: draft

Emotional intelligence is the ability to identify, understand and manage
moods and feelings in both ourselves and others.

 

There are three aspects:

 

<ul>
<ul>
1.  [Self-Awareness]()-
    the ability to identify moods and feelings in ourselves and
    understand how they affect others
2.  [Self-Direction]()
    - the ability to alter our feelings and change our mood to **our**
    advantage
3.  [Interpersonal
    Savvy]()*'*
    - the ability to identify and manage the emotional states of other
    people

</ul>
</ul>
 

A fourth area of [Organizational
Savvy]()
is also identified, as the application of the above to tackling problems
in the workplace.

 

 

**Self-Awareness**

 

<ul>
-   **Understand the brain-body-behaviour connection**. Thoughts lead to
    feelings and physical sensations (if we think an important
    presentation is going to go badly, we feel nervous). Feelings and
    physical sensations shape our behaviour. Behaviour affects our
    thinking. Deliberately behaving in a certain way can create the
    corresponding thoughts and mood.
-   **Examine your emotions**. As stated above, emotions can affect our
    behaviour. But we often experience emotions that are not really
    appropriate, such as feeling nervous about a presentation for which
    we are well-prepared and well-practised. The key to controlling our
    emotions is to be aware of them and examine them objectively, then
    to try to identify the thoughts that led to them. It if often the
    case that the thoughts that lead to negative emotions come from an
    inner voice that does not describe the reality of the situation, and
    can be overridden.
-   **Label your emotions**. This helps us to think about them
    objectively.
-   **Distinguish between fact and feeling**. Facts are interpreted in
    different ways by different people, who consequently have different
    feelings about them (Relationship Counsellor: "How often do you have
    sex?" Woody Allen: "Hardly ever - three times a week." Girlfriend:
    "All the time - three times a week!") We can train ourselves to
    distinguish between fact and feeling. "That presentation went badly"
    is an evaluation not a fact; a thought that will elicit negative
    feelings.
-   **Marry your perceptions with those of others**. When it comes to
    strengths and weaknesses, there is no absolute reality. Other people
    may perceive your strengths and weaknesses differently from you;
    they may even perceive your strengths (e.g. confidence) as weakness
    (e.g. arrogance). Being aware of this is an important part of
    emotional intelligence.

<ul>
<li>
**Reflect and evaluate**. Evaluate events by asking the following
questions (use the mnemonic SABRE):

-   Situation (what was it?)

</li>
-   Action (what did you do?)
-   Behaviour (how did others behave and how did they respond to you?)
-   Result (what was the outcome and how did everyone feel about it?)
-   Evaluation (what could you have done better?)

</ul>
-   **Seek feedback**.

-   **Accept feedback with good grace**.

-   **Identify your priorities**. Being explicitly aware of our
    priorities is essential to achieving them.

<ul>
<li>
**Write your eulogy**. This helps to identify what it important to us.

</li>
<li>
**Discover your vision**. A vision is an image of what success looks
like. Not just an action plan, but something that sums up our life's
ambitions.

</li>
<li>
**Set SMART goals**. Goals should be:

-   Specific
-   Measurable
-   Achievable

</li>
-   Realistic

-   Timed

</ul>
</ul>
 

**Self-Direction**

 

<ul>
<ul>
-   **Break the link**. When we feel strong emotion we have a tendency
    to act first and think later. Instead, as soon as we start to feel
    an emotion and the associated physical sensations, we should
    question it.

-   **Challenge automatic negative thoughts**. These are private,
    uncensored views that pop into our heads when we experience strong
    emotions. They are unavoidable but we can challenge them rather than
    letting them lead to negative action.

-   **Put it into perspective**. Ask "is this problem going to kill me?"
    or more usefully "is this still going to be affecting me in five
    years?"

-   **Manage physical sensations and symptoms**. The brain-body link
    works both ways; while emotions can cause physical sensations,
    controlling physical sensations can also help to control our
    emotional state. Breathing techniques are the most common
    application of this.

<ul>
<li>
**Recite personal affirmations**. The cyclical brain-body-behaviour link
allows us to manipulate our emotions by training our brains to engage in
positive thoughts.

</li>
<li>
**Take a problem-solving approach**. When encountering problems, check
they are tangible problems in the outside world or a problem
interpretation and reaction. The strategies above help problems of the
latter kind, but in the event of a tangible problem, it can be tackled
in the following way:

1.  Define the problem

</li>
1.  Generate possible solutions

1.  Create a shortlist

1.  Weigh up pros and cons

1.  Make a choice

</ul>
-   **Make a list**. Write down all of the important tasks you need to
    accomplish over a number of hours. Don't write everything; make it
    achievable by writing down a few tasks you can realistically
    complete. Break big tasks into manageable chunks. By achieving even
    modest targets in this way, the brain can release reward chemicals,
    thus improving motivation.
-   **Visualize success**. Visualizing success causes the brain to
    release chemicals that promote positive feelings.
-   **Use emotional anchors**.
-   **Walk tall**. Controlling posture and body language is another
    example of controlling behaviour to influence emotional state.

<ul>
<li>
**Handle setbacks**. There are five stages in response to a big setback:

1.  Denial
2.  Anger

</li>
1.  Disorientation and depression

1.  Acceptance
2.  Renewal

</ul>
</ul>
</ul>
Understanding this allows us to identify which stage we are in and
accelerate the process of recovery.

<ul>
<ul>
-   **Develop your emotional resilience**. Setbacks are often all in the
    mind, so how we recover depends on how we perceive the setback and
    how resilient we are. Learn to acknowledge setback rather than
    denying them, deal constructively with anger, etc.

</ul>
</ul>
 

 

**Interpersonal Savvy**

 

There are four aspects:

 

<ul>
<ul>
1.  Empathy and rapport.

1.  Communication.
2.  Building rewarding relationships.

1.  Tackling unsatisfactory relationships.

</ul>
</ul>
 

<ul>
<ul>
<ul>
<li>
**Empathy and rapport**.

-   Listen, listen, listen

</li>
-   Read emotional cues

-   Ask questions

-   Demonstrate listening and sensitivity

-   Make eye contact, don't stare

</ul>
<ul>
<li>
**Communication**.

-   Reinforce rapport through self-disclosure

</li>
-   Express your emotions

-   Disclose secrets with care

-   Make effective requests

-   Give constructive feedback

-   Assert yourself

-   Learn to say no, but...
-   Communicate without words

-   Mind your language

</ul>
<ul>
<li>
**Building rewarding relationships**.

-   Respond and reciprocate

</li>
-   Understand innermost needs

-   Respect relationship boundaries

-   Build "other-esteem"

-   Control emotional outbursts

-   Facilitate problem-solving

-   See the glass as half-full

</ul>
<ul>
<li>
**Tackling unsatisfactory relationships**.

-   Broach disagreements
-   Discuss differences
-   Acknowledge personality differences
-   Respect personality differences
-   Establish ground rules

</li>
-   Restore goodwill

-   Act as a peacemaker

</ul>
</ul>
</ul>
 

 

**Organizational Savvy**

 

<ul>
<ul>
-   **Become politically aware**. Being alert to office politics is an
    essential skill for being successful. Be aware of key
    decision-makers and the relationships between them, and build
    relationships with them. The key players are not always the most
    senior people. Be aware of gatekeepers: those who may not hold
    influence themselves but act as a filter to key players
    (secretaries, support staff, PAs).

<ul>
<li>
**Understand your culture**. The culture of an organisation is the set
of unwritten rules that govern how peopleshould actually behave. There
are four basic questions to ask to understand an organisation's culture:

1.  Team or individual performance? Should you work selflessly for the
    benefit of the team of look after your own interests?

</li>
1.  High or low sociability?

1.  Meritocracy or "politocracy"? Will you be rewarded for the good work
    you have done or for being known and liked by your managers?

1.  High versus low risk? Note that an organisation that rewards those
    who take chances and succeed may not be a highly risk-tolerant
    culture, if it simultaneously punishes those who take risks and
    fail.

</ul>
<ul>
<li>
**Deepen your understanding of culture**. Consider:

1.  What does the dress code say about the culture?
2.  How direct are people in their communications?

</li>
1.  How much control is exerted on employees?
2.  To what extent does the organisation live by its stated values?
3.  What are the unwritten rules about perks and benefits?

</ul>
-   **Identify role models and mentors**.
-   **Exert indirect influence**. If you are unable to influence someone
    directly, you may be able to do so through a third party.
-   **Demonstrate integrity**

</ul>
</ul>
 

