Title: Speaking your Mind by Rebecca Stott, Tory Young and Cordelia Bryan
Date: 2015-02-21 19:24
Author: 0x7df
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 75
Status: draft
Tags: review

<ul>
<ul>
1.  Introduction

<ol>
<li>
Conversations and seminars

1.  Conversation

</li>
<ol>
<li>
Analysing conversation

-   When conversing, most people follow certain assumed principles: they
    will not obstruct the flow of conversation, they will speak clearly
    and truthfully, and they will follow the principle of politeness.
-   The **metamessage** is the sum total of content, context and body
    language.
-   Gestures that mimic what they refer to, for example the size of some
    object, are deacribed as **iconic**. Other gestures by convention
    stand for certain meanings, such as a nod of the head for
    affirmation.

</li>
-   Conversation analysts speak of **adjacency pairs**, which consist of
    a **first part pair** and a **second part pair**. These pairs
    consist of an utterance and a response, or a question and answer.
-   **Turn-suppressing** or **turn-claiming cues**, such as a raised
    hand, urgent nod or turning towards someone else, let the speaker
    know they should give up the turn.

-   The ending of a conversation is known as the **terminal exchange**.
    A topic introduced to end a conversation is **closing implicative**.

-   **Deictic words** are pointing words, such as this, that and here.

-   Cohesion in conversation is created by **anaphoric reference**, the
    referring back to earlier content.
-   An excellent way of ensuring you have understood the speaker is to
    paraphrase or summarise their comments in your own mind before you
    respond. Active listening requires us to paraphrase and summarise
    and we do this by looking for key words and phrases, analogies and
    metaphors that make sense to us, as we listen.
-   Good speakers usually give signposts to indicate the main structure
    of their points. These are usually clue words such as 'firstly',
    'next', 'finally' and 'on the other hand'. Sometime the signals come
    in sentences such as 'There are three wyas...' or 'I will present
    four reasons...'. These let you know what is coming. Usually the
    signposts are emphasised by the speaker's tone of voice, inflection,
    body language and facial expression.

</ol>
1.  Gender and conversation
2.  Literary conversations
3.  Seminars
4.  Analysing seminars

1.  Chairing seminars

</ol>
<ol>
<li>
Rhetoric and argument

1.  Argument
    -   A communicative process used for the growth of knowledge, a
        process based on making claims, asserting and challenging,
        assenting and dissenting. It is conversational in nature,
        involves critical reasoning, and depends upon participants
        coming prepared to reach an agreement.

</li>
<ol>
<li>
Analysing argument

<ul>
<li>
Once of the simplest ways of analysing argument is to use the terms
**claimant** and **interlocutor**. The claimant makes a claim and tries
to persuade others of its validity; the interlocutor repsond to the
claim and refine it by asking questions, objecting to claims, putting
forward counter-claims, and producing evidence to support the
counter-claims.

</li>
<li>
Other key features are the **audience**, who will or will not be
persuaded by the argument, the use of reason to reach an agreement, and
the adaption of the premise on which the argument is based to the
particular audience.

</li>
<li>
The following skills are required to argue effectively:

-   Openness to the positions of others

</li>
-   Good listening skills

-   The ability to reason effectively
-   The ability to ask good questions

-   The ability to collect appropriate evidence

-   The ability to see the sequence of the argument
-   The ability to summarise accurately the positions of others
-   The ability to think around an issue

-   The ability to speak so people will listen
-   Clarity
-   Conciseness
-   Confidence

-   Good judgement

</ul>
</li>
</ol>
<ol>
<li>
Rhetoric

-   Rhetoric means 'the art of persuasion'. A rhetor was an ancient
    Greek or Roman teacher of rhetoric. When we say something is
    rhetorical, we mean it has been constructed to have persuasive
    effect.
-   Aristotle defined rhetoric as the art of discovering all the
    available means of persuasion in any given case. He insists that
    rhetoric can adapt to any new subject area; it is possible to find
    the means of persuasion for any given subject.
-   Rhetoric grew with the emergence of democracies, presumably because
    within a democracy people have to be persuaded not ruled by force.

</li>
<ul>
<li>
Aristotle classifies the mean of persuasion into three categories:

1.  **Ethos**: persuasion through personality and stance

</li>
1.  **Pathos**: persuasion through arousal of emotion

1.  **Logos**: persuasion through reasoning.

</ul>
<ul>
<li>
The Roman rhetorician Quintillian (writing in AD 94) said rhetoric
consisted of:

1.  **Invention**: the finding of arguments or proofs

</li>
1.  **Disposition**: the arrangement of such matters
2.  **Style**: the choice of words, verbal patterns and rhythms that
    will most effectively express the material.

</ul>
<ul>
<li>
Later rhetoricians came to think of three types of rhetoric:

1.  **Deliberative**: to persuade an audience to approve or disapprove
    of a particular point of view or policy (e.g. in a parliamentary
    address)

</li>
1.  **Forensic**: to achieve condemnation or approval of a person's
    actions (e.g. in a court)

1.  **Epideictic**: to enlarge on the praiseworthiness or sometime
    blameworthiness of a person or group (usually in a ceremonial
    context).

</ul>
</ol>
1.  Analysing rhetoric

</ol>
<ol>
<li>
Shakespeare and Renaissance rhetoric

1.  Politics, class and rhetoric in Shakespearean England

</li>
1.  Rhetoric in the grammar schools

1.  Dialogue, gender, and a rhetorical duel

1.  Rhetoric and the drama of persuasion

<ol>
<li>
Tropes - the building blocks of rhetoric

-   **Tropes** are rhetorical figures or structures (a trope means a
    'turn' in language which catches the attention of the reader or
    listener).

</li>
<ul>
<li>
The 20 most common tropes are:

1.  Alliteration

</li>
1.  Anaphora: repetition of the same word in succeeding clauses or
    sentences

1.  Antithesis: close placing of contrasting words and therefore ideas
2.  Aposiopesis: breaking off a sentence before completion, often
    indicating passionate feeling

1.  Assonance: grouping the same or similar vowels closely in a sequence
    of words

1.  Climax: repeating the final word of the first phrase at the
    beginning of the second, the final word of the second at the
    beginning of the third, etc.

1.  Ekphrasis: a vivid description written in a style intended to match
    its subject.

1.  Erotema: a rhetorical question

1.  Hyperbaton: particular deviation from the expected word order

1.  Hyperbole

1.  Irony

1.  Metaphor

1.  Onomatopoeia

1.  Oxymoron

1.  Parison: repetition of a particular grammatical structure in linked
    clauses or sentences

1.  Periphrasis: an expansive way of saying something that might be said
    more concisely

1.  Prosopopoeia: personification

1.  Puns
2.  Simile
3.  Synecdoche: replacing the whole or the general with a part

</ul>
</ol>
1.  Using tropes: Julius Caesar

1.  Using tropes: Hamlet

</ol>
1.  Everyday rhetorics
    1.  Rhetoric in the criminal court
    2.  Rhetoric is everywhere
    3.  Rhetoric in selling
    4.  Rhetoric in story-telling

<ol>
<li>
Preparing your case

<ol>
<li>
When is a presentation helpful?

</li>
<li>
Preparation - knowing your audience

</li>
<li>
Invention, or gathering material

<ul>
<li>
The steps to be considered are:

1.  Understand the context (know and understand the wider picture)

</li>
1.  Identify your objective

1.  Think about your audience

1.  Think round the issues (try to see them from many different vantage
    points)

</ul>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
<ol>
<li>
Disposition, or arrangement of material

<ul>
<li>
Ask yourself:

1.  What is your objective?
2.  What are the means of persuasion?
3.  What is relevant/not relevant?

</li>
1.  What are the most important points and will they persuade this
    audience?
2.  What evidence is most persuasive and effective and what does this
    evidence prove in terms of your selected main points?

1.  How will you arrange your material so that it is most effective with
    your audience?

1.  How will you show your audience that you have moved from one main
    point to another?

1.  How will you show the links between the different parts of the
    argument, the sequence of the argument and how each point connects
    to the others?

</ul>
</li>
</ol>
1.  Style, or expressing the argument

</ol>
<ol>
<li>
Presenting your case

1.  Learning presentation skills
2.  Types of presentation
3.  Register

</li>
1.  Overcoming your nerves
2.  Giving and receiving feedback
3.  Using anecdotes, analogies and examples

1.  Practice makes perfect
2.  Notes, demonstrations and visual aids
3.  Some final preparations

</ol>
</ul>
</ul>
 

 

