Title: The Tiger That Isn't by Michael Blastland and Andrew Dilnot
Date: 2015-02-21 19:26
Author: 0x7df
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 77
Status: draft
Tags: review

Introduction

"Size: Make it Personal"

The first question to ask upon encountering a number should be "is this
a big number?" Essentially, judgements about the size of numbers cannot
be properly made unless the number is put in context, and it is
especially important to be wary of large nmbers. The best way to do this
is somehow to relate the number in question to a human scale: for
example by dividing it by the number of people it is supposed to affect.

Some examples:

-   If the government raises the retirement age from 65 to 67, 1 in 5
    who would have survived to retirement age no longer will. In essence
    this means that someone who reaches 65 years of age has a 1 in 5
    chance of dying in the next 2 years, which is clearly a
    preposterously high proportion. In fact only 4% of those reaching
    age 65 will die before they are 67.

-   The government will spend an extra £300m over 5 years to create a
    million new childcare places. This corresponds to £300 for each of
    the million new places, and spread over 5 years amounts to £60 per
    year per place, or £1.15 per week per place. This is a minuscule
    amount.

-   The NHS is heading for a budget deficit of £0.8bn. This seems a
    large figure when viewed out of context, but it corresponds to about
    1% of the total annual NHS budget, and the ability to hit a
    financial target to within 1% is very good by any standards. NHS
    spending is about £1600 per head per annum, and a 1% deficit is
    therefore £16, which is less than the cost of a single visit to the
    GP (£18).

"Counting: Use Mushy Peas"

In order to produce statistics, something must be counted; and in order
to count something, it must be identified and defined. Varying the
definition can change the number: for example, in order to count how
many people are out of work it is necessary to define what "unemployed"
means. (Mrs. Thatcher's government changed the definition of
"unemployed" 23 times.) This is often extremely difficult in the real
world: especially where people are involved. The things being counted
are frequently ill-defined, variable, or change over time. Therefore, it
is often the case when statistics are quoted that the definition of the
thing being counted has been simplified or modified to allow the
counting to take place, and it is important to know whether this
simplification has invalidated the meaning of the statistic.

"Chance: The Tiger That Isn't"

The existence of clusters of apparently unusual events does not
necessarily indicate a single cause, or a relationship between the
events in the cluster. For example, an unusually large number of cancer
cases close to a mobile phone mast may occur because the signals from
the mast cause cancer, but it also may occur due to chance, and have no
connection to the mast whatsoever. Here "by chance" does not mean
without cause, but simply that the causes are not properly understood or
too complex or numerous for precise numerical predictions to be made.
Theoretically, if a bag of rice is thrown in the air and allowed to fall
on the floor, the pattern of rice on the floor could be precisely
calculated in advance, but because the calculation is impossible in
practice, the pattern might as well be random.

People tend to underestimate how big clusters can be and how frequently
they can arise. This can be shown by taking cards one at a time from a
well-shuffled pack of cards and observing the longest run of cards of
one colour or the other: asked in advance most people would predict a
run of 2 or 3, but a run of 5 or 6 is quite likely. The same can be
demonstrated by tossing a coin repeatedly. Evolution has probably
programmed us to be good at recognising patterns quickly, perhaps even
where there are none - it is better to assume that a pattern in the
grass is actually a tiger and to flee than to assume the opposite and
linger.

Chance can also cause numbers to rise and fall over time, without a
simple, definitely identifiable cause. For example, accident rates on a
particular stretch of road will rise and fall. If, after one particular
rise, a speed camera is installed and a subsequent fall in accidents
occurs, then it may be claimed that the speed camera reduces accidents.
However, the rise may simply be a chance crest, after which rates would
fall anyway. This is called "regression to the mean": after a recent
trough or crest, rates will move back towards the long-term average
value.

"Averages: The White Rainbow"

Averages are useful for summarising large amounts of data, but obscure
the variety of those data, and may be misleading. Also, there is a
tendency to equate "average" with "typical", "normal" or "reasonable",
which is often wrong.

-   The average length of pregnancy is quoted as 280 days. However, late
    babies are induced after a maximum of 2 weeks, so late births that
    would otherwise push the average up are brought forward
    artificially. The average is therefore shorter than it would be if
    nature were left to its own devices. Even if we ignore this, we find
    the median is 282 days: i.e. we must remember that the average is
    not in the middle.

-   The average UK salary in 2005/06 was £23k PA. However the median was
    only £18.8k, so much more than half the population earns less than
    the national average. The average is skewed towards a higher value
    by a small number of very high earners. If we imagine all the people
    in the world were made as tall as they are wealthy, with a person of
    average wealth being given average height, then put them all in an
    hour-long procession starting with the poorest, then for the first
    20 minutes no-one is visible due to having zero or even negative
    wealth. Only after 48 minutes have passed do we see someone of
    average height, and in the last few minutes heights become
    exceptional, with the last being over 10 miles high. This shows how
    non-Gaussian the distribution of wealth is compared with the
    distribution of actual heights.

"Targets: The Whole Elephant"

Performance targets and indicators, like averages, attempt to reduce a
complex situation to a single number and in doing so ignore many other
facets of the situation. There are 2 main problems: the first is
"gaming" in which the individuals responsible for ensuring the target is
met focus resources on it in such a way that quality in other areas is
reduced. For example, a doctor is told to treat a particular patient
urgently because they are about to exceed a waiting time threshold,
despite there being another patient more urgently requiring medical
attention, but who has already breached the threshold. The other problem
is that even without gaming, it is rarely the case the one aspect of
something chosen to become the focus of the target robustly represents
the whole.

"Risk: Make it Personal II"

"Measurement: How to Drink from a Fire Hose"

"Data: Know the Unknowns"

Shock Figures: Wayward Tee Shots

"Comparison: Mind the Gap"

"Causation: Think Twice"

A correlation does not imply causation; the assumption that it does is a
common mistake, especially when the causation seems plausible, or fits
an existing prejudice. For example:

-   Girls educated at single-sex schools perform better in exams. This
    may be true, but the implication that the single-sex education is
    the cause of the improved performance may not be. An alternative
    explanation is that wealthy parents are more likely to send their
    children to single-sex schools, which are typically fee-paying, and
    that children of wealthy parents are also more likely to perform
    better at school. Whenever attempts have been made to adjust
    performance data for the socio-economic status of the students,
    single-sex schools have performed no better than co-ed.

