Title: Nuclear Sites in the UK
Date: 2015-02-21 20:20
Author: 0x7df
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 85
Status: draft
Tags: nuclear
 

   
Calder Hall

 

Calder Hall was the UK’s first nuclear power station, opened in 1956 by
the Queen. The Calder Hall site adjoined the Windscale site, and two
dual-purpose reactors for plutonium and power production, called PIPPAs,
were constructed there from 1953, and a further two from 1955 onwards.
(Four additional PIPPAs were constructed from 1955 onwards at
Chapelcross, across the Solway Firth in Dumfriesshire.) These were
Magnox reactors, in which the natural uranium was canned in Magnox
(magnesium oxide), rather than aluminium, sine this alloy has a low
neutron cross-section and can withstand a higher operating temperature
than aluminium. The Magnox reactors at Calder Hall, and those at
Chapelcross, were still generating electricity in 1991.

 

Capenhurst

 

Enrichment has taken place at Capenhurst using the diffusion process
since the early 1950s. Originally for the national weapons programme,
the plant was converted for civilian grade enrichment in the mind 1960s.
1971 was the start of collaboration between BNFL and Dutch and German
organisations to develop the more efficient centrifuge process. In 1977,
the first commercial scale centrifuge plant was opened at Capenhurst.
Similar plants were build in Holland and Germany. Enrichment services
were sold jointly under the banner of Urenco. The diffusion plant ceased
operations in 1982 and work commenced on decommissioning the plant.

 

In 1995, the Capenhurst site was confirmed as BNFL’s uranic storage
facility. Subsequently approval was given for a programme to modernise
and upgrade the uranium storage facilities, housed in the former
diffusion plant.

 

The site safely stores uranic materials prior to their long-term re-use
within the nuclear fuel cycle.

   
Chapelcross

 

Chapelcross in Dumfriesshire was the site of four PIPPA-type reactors
(dual-purpose plutonium production and power production reactors), on
which construction began in 1955.

   
Dounreay

 

Site of the UK’s first and only fast reactor, the Dounreay Fast Reactor
(DFR). Construction began in 1955 and the reactor was operational by
1959. It was not the first fast reactor in the world but the first small
fast reactor capable of generating significant power.

   
Harwell

 

Harwell, originally an airfield 15 miles from Oxford, was chosen as the
site of the UK’s first nuclear research establishment, set up in 1945 by
Clement Attlee’s Labour government to study “all uses of atomic energy”.
The first director was Sir John Cockcroft.

   
Risley

 

In 1946, one year after Harwell, a research establishment was set up at
Risley, near Warrington. Its purpose was to undertake the production of
fissile material “for whatever purpose it might be required”. It was
directed by Christopher Hinton. When the Atomic Energy Authority was
formed Risley became the home of the Production Group (which made up the
AEA along with the Industrial Group based at Harwell and the Weapons
Group lead by Penney). Risley was also later the location of the AEA
central safety organisation.

   
Sellafield

 

Sellafield, an ex-Royal Ordnance Factory on the Cumbrian coast, was the
site of the UK’s first nuclear reactor, although it was renamed
Windscale at the time to avoid confusion with Springfields. The original
Windscale reactors (there were two piles, simply called 1 and 2) were
graphite-moderated, air-cooled natural uranium reactors built with the
intention of producing plutonium for the UK’s NW programme. Pile No. 1
went critical in 1950 and Pile No. 2 in 1951.

 

Since plutonium production was the purpose, an on-site chemical
separation plant was required, from which the first piece of British
plutonium was extracted in 1952 (the first UK weapon test, which used
plutonium from Windscale, was on 3rd October 1952). Windscale continued
to reprocess fuel from the UK’s Magnox reactors.

 

Windscale was also the site of the first advanced gas-cooled reactor
(AGR); this 28 MW reactor began to supply power to the national grid in
1963.

 

Sellafield is the site of the Thorp reprocessing plant and the
Sellafield MOX Plant (SMP).

   
Sizewell B

 

The last nuclear power station to be built in the UK, in 1995. The UK’s
only pressurised water reactor.

   
Springfields

 

Sprigfields, near Preston, was the UK’s first nuclear manufacturing
facility, designed to extract uranium from ore or concentrate, reduce it
to metal, and to cast and machine it into fuel elements.

   
Wylfa

 

Wylfa, in Angleseym is the site of the last of the nine Magnox reactors
to be built in the UK.

 

 

 

