Title: X-ray interactions with matter
Date: 2015-02-22 16:29
Author: 0x7df
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 96
Status: draft

Overview
--------

Because of the electromagnetic nature of X-ray photons, they interact
strongly with charged particles, or the electric fields thereof. Several
processes can occur when photons interact with matter. Some are listed
here and dealt with separately below:

-   Elastic (coherent) scattering
-   Inelastic (incoherent) scattering
-   Compton scattering
-   Photoelectric effect
-   Resonance absorption
-   Fluorescence
-   Stimulated emission
-   Pair production (nuclear)
-   Electronic pair production
-   Photodisintegration/photofission
-   Photonuclear effect

Elastic (Coherent) Scattering
-----------------------------

When a photon scatters off a bound electron, it may scatter elastically
or inelastically. In the former, the photon energy is less than the
energy required to excite the atom to an excited state, so the atom
remains in its ground state, and the photon is scattered. The scattering
is described as elastic since the incoming and outgoing (scattered)
photons have the same energy. Such scattering is often therefore called
classical scattering, since the classical theory of electromagnetic
radiation does not permit changes in frequency (energy); the incident
radiation causes the electron to oscillate and therefore to re-emit
radiation of the same frequency. In the special case in which the
scattering target is much smaller than the wavelength of the radiation,
the scattering is called Rayleigh scattering, which has the special
property that the scattering cross-section varies as 1/λ^4^.

-   Interaction centre: bound electrons
-   Energy range: < 10 keV
-   *Z*-dependence: *Z*^2^
-   *E*-dependence: *E*^-1^ (notes) or None (LLNL paper)

Inelastic (Incoherent) Scattering
---------------------------------

In inelastic scattering, the photon does have enough energy to cause the
atom to make a transition to an excited state. The energy of the
outgoing photon is equal to the energy of incoming photon minus the
excitation energy.

Compton Scattering
------------------

Compton scattering is a special case of inelastic scattering in which
the scattering electron is removed entirely from the atom. The
relationship between the incident and scattered photons is:

$$ E' = \frac{E}{1 + \frac{E\left(1 -
cos\theta\right)}{m_ec^2}} $$

where *m*~e~*c*^2^ is the rest mass of the electron and *θ* is the
scattering angle. Clearly, for small scattering angle,
$ \\cos\theta \approx 1$ and the photon energy is
changed very little. The electron energy, or Compton defect, is given
by:

$$ E_e = E - E' $$

The Compton scattering cross-section is given by the Klein-Nishina
formulae. For $ E > m_ec^2$, electrons are
scattered predominantly in the forward direction.

Compton scattering is the dominant interaction at intermediate photon
energies.

-   Interaction centre: "free" electrons
-   Energy range: 300 - 1500 keV
-   *Z*-dependence: None (notes) or *Z* (LLNL paper)
-   *E*-dependence: *E*^-1^

Photoelectric Effect
--------------------

In the photoelectric effect, the incident photon has sufficient energy
to remove the electron from the atom altogether, thus ionising it. The
photon is absorbed completely, its energy *hν* going into overcoming the
electronic binding energy *B*~e~, with any excess then appearing as the
kinetic energy of the electron *E*~e~:

$$ E_e = h\nu - B_e $$

Simultaneously with the emission of an electron is the emission of
several further photons in the X-ray part of the spectrum, as the newly
created vacancy in the inner shell is filled; this is fluorescence.

The photoelectric effect is the dominant interaction at low photon
energies. The cross-section exhibits peaks at photon energies equal to
the binding energies of the electron shells

-   Interaction centre: tightly-bound electrons
-   Energy range: 0.1 - 500 keV
-   *Z*-dependence: *Z*^3^
-   *E*-dependence: *E*^-3^

\\section{Pair Production}

Photon interaction with the electrinc field of the positively-charged
nucleus gives rise to pair production; that is, the annihilation of the
photon with the creation of an electron and a positron. The pair
production threshold s therefore 1.02 MeV (2$m_ec^2$). While eergy
is conserved in pair production, there is a broad spectrum of positron
and electron energies.

Pair production is the dominant interaction at high photon energies.

Interaction centre: Nuclear electric field

Energy range: > 1022 keV

$Z$-dependence:$Z$ (notes) or$Z^2$ (LLNL paper)

$E$-dependence:$(E-1022)$ (notes) or$(E-1022)^2$ (LLNL paper)

\\section{Photonuclear Effect}

The interaction of photons with the nucleus results in the emission of
photonucleons (protons or neutrons). For most nuclei, the photonuclear
emission threshold is about 10 MeV.

